---
title: "Exploring the role of diffusive coupling in spatiotemporal chaos"
collection: publications
# category: manuscripts
# permalink: /publication/2009-10-01-paper-title-number-1
# excerpt: 'This paper is about the number 1. The number 2 is left for future work.'
date: 2024-10-07
venue: 'Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science'
# slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0210661'
citation: 'A. Raj and M. R. Paul, "Exploring the role of diffusive coupling in spatiotemporal chaos" <i>Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science</i>, vol. 34, no. 10, p. 103113, Oct. 2024.'
---


Abstract: We explore the chaotic dynamics of a large one-dimensional lattice of coupled maps with diffusive coupling of varying strength using the covariant Lyapunov vectors (CLVs). Using a lattice of diffusively coupled quadratic maps, we quantify the growth of spatial structures in the chaotic dynamics as the strength of diffusion is increased. When the diffusion strength is increased from zero, we find that the leading Lyapunov exponent decreases rapidly from a positive value to zero to yield a small window of periodic dynamics which is then followed by chaotic dynamics. For values of the diffusion strength beyond the window of periodic dynamics, the leading Lyapunov exponent does not vary significantly with the strength of diffusion with the exception of a small variation for the largest diffusion strengths we explore. The Lyapunov spectrum and fractal dimension are described analytically as a function of the diffusion strength using the eigenvalues of the coupling operator. The spatial features of the CLVs are quantified and compared with the eigenvectors of the coupling operator. The chaotic dynamics are composed entirely of physical modes for all of the conditions we explore. The leading CLV is highly localized and localization decreases with increasing strength of the spatial coupling. The violation of the dominance of Oseledets splitting indicates that the entanglement of pairs of CLVs becomes more significant between neighboring CLVs as the strength of diffusion is increased.